for the first time ever a direct Iranian
attack on Israel a barrage of drones and
nissar fired in retaliation for a strike
on the Iranian Consulate in Syria most
were shot down but the world watches
with deepening concern who'll be saying
what to whom to try and bring calm this
is Inside Story
[Music]
hello there I'm James Bay Iran warned it
would attack Israel in reprisal for the
bombing of its Consulate in Syria and 13
days later it did a huge wave of weapons
launched most shot down by Israel's air
defense systems with limited damage or
casualties we're told perhaps as some
analysts have said it's a kind of high
stake sparring with Iran choosing not to
unleash much greater Firepower it has in
its Arsenal a choreographed display to
flex Iranian military muscle against its
Arch Enemy maybe as much for domestic
consumption as to send a message to Tel
Aviv however the Diplomatic
reverberations being felt far and wide
with fears about what might happen next
so how serious is the risk of wider
conflict and what's being done to
prevent that and is the US President Joe
Biden the only person who can now reign
in Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu we'll be exploring what might
happen next with our panel of guests in
a few moments but first this report from
Lena Abu
akle the shock waves from Iran's attack
are reverberating
worldwide with many political leaders
alarmed by The Barrage of drones and
[Music]
missiles it's the first time Iranian
weapons have directly targeted Israel
from Iran Israel said air defense
systems intercepted most of them
tahran had vowed Revenge after
revolutionary guard commanders were
killed in the bombing of the Iranian
Consulate in Syria two weeks ago the
missile barrage increases International
worries of sparking a wider regional
conflict but Iranian military leaders
sought to draw a line under the latest
hostilities we see this operation has
completed and successful and there is no
intention to continue it and it's over
from our perspective but if the Zionist
regime does anything against us either
inside our soil or anywhere in Syria or
other countries our next operation will
be much bigger if the US gets involved
in any action against us none of its
bases will remain safe in the region but
words from the top in Israel will do
little to ease fears of more conflict to
come this campaign is not over yet we
need to remain prepared and attentive to
the the idf's and Home Front commands
instructions and to prepare for any
scenario at the same time we blocked the
first wave of attacks and we did it with
great success US President Joe Biden has
again vowed to defend Israel but wants
to avoid open conflict with
Iran since Israel genocidal war in Gaza
began in October killing and wounding
more than 100,000
Palestinians fears have grown that the
violence could explode into to a wider
War International diplomats are working
frantically to avoid further military
action that could have devastating
Regional and Global
consequences lenina abak Al jazer for
Inside
Story well we're going to define the
significance of this escalation in the
Iran Israel conflict with our panel
today in tran Muhammad Mandi is a
professor at the University of Iran and
he's advised the Iranian negotiating
team at International nuclear talks in
London Yosi meckelberg is an associate
fellow at the British Think Tank chattam
house and in Washington D.C Akbar Shahed
Ahmed is senior diplomatic correspondent
at HuffPost he's covered US foreign
policy since the Obama Administration
thank you all three of you for joining
us today Muhammad let me start with you
we have had literally Decades of
hostility and proxy attack
between Israel and Iran but what has
changed in recent hours would you say
that Israel and Iran are now at
War well first of all the strikes last
night against Israeli regime were very
devastating the Iranians severely
damaged two military bases and uh the
propaganda that we're seeing 24 hours a
day literally now in the western media
about how little damage was caused is is
absolute nonsense the Iranians sent many
very cheap drones and old missiles as
decoys maybe a couple of million dollars
and the Israelis spent $ 1.3 billion
dollar to down them and then the main
missiles all got through and struck the
military bases and if the Israelis are
so confident about themselves then I
guess today they can take International
reporters to see the base the two bases
for them El but beyond that we have to
remember that Iran has shown strategic
patience for years and the Israelis
carried out assassinations in Iran years
p and sabotage when that failed they
started to assassinate Iranian officers
in Syria who were fighting Isis and
Al-Qaeda and their Affiliates who were
being supported by the Israelis among
others alongside the Golan Heights and
uh and during the last 6 months when
Iran has uh been supporting Gaza and the
resistance and uh been opposing the
genocide the israelies murdered a number
of officers of Iran and Syria and Iran
did not retaliate at least directly
because Iran wanted to keep the focus uh
in the past on the fight against Isis
and Al-Qaeda and now the focus on Gaza
because the Americans want the Americans
and the Israelis and the West want to
change the narrative but since the
Israeli regime struck the Iranian
Embassy and the US Britain and France
and un Security Council refused not only
to punish the Israeli regime but to
condemn it Iranians were obviously
forced to punish the regime and this has
changed the equation this is the big
change okay now let me bring in let me
bring let me bring in Yosi and ask how
it's changed the equation people have
talked about this for a long time as a
shadow war is it now a hot
War yeah it's it's was a direct attack
let me start what I actually agree with
the previous speaker is that Iran showed
strategic patience for for many years
and that's you know fighting through
proxies actually serves the the the
Iranian regime but it definitely didn't
serve it last night and I don't know
where where this information about
hitting our 90 90% of the around 350
drones missile cruise missile ballistic
missiles were intercepted and probably
didn't cause much much much damage sadly
it's injured badly one young girl and I
think in this sense the question is what
happens next but it set it changed the
the the parameters of this conflict from
a shadow War for what Israel calls war
between Wars in into a direct one now
Iran says on the one hand this is a
close chapter we want to move on from
there Israel said it would retaliate I
think in this sense it's better for
Israel not to retaliate yet because what
happened yesterday after Israel actually
experienced months of and months of
criticism from its closest allies for
the way it conducts the war and
unacceptable way it conducts the war in
Gaza actually Iran and tan managed
yesterday to unite the United States as
some countries in the region Europe in
defending in Israel so I'm not so sure
in in what sense this was a strategic
success for uh for for Iran but at the
same time there are pressures within the
Israeli government within the to to
retaliate but as as as it stands and as
you alluded earlier the the cards are
with President Biden to ensure that
there is no further
escalation abbar how worried are they in
DC because of course there's a nuclear
Dimension to this Israel doesn't talk
about it but we all know it's a nuclear
power Iran has a nuclear program and
most experts say if they they wanted to
develop a nuclear device the breakout
time is just a matter of days
now absolutely that's a huge fear um and
I think that's an awareness for the
Biden Administration in particular which
did not pursue right the Obama era
nuclear deal that PR Donald Trump
torpedoed the Biden Administration knows
that their choices have brought Iran
much closer to nuclear capacity than you
know ever before and they know Israel
right now has a huge incentive to begin
a big war I think for us officials what
they're thinking right now is how do we
get Israel to as Yosi said see it as
logical and beneficial to not escalate
however what we know from six months of
this conflict now in Gaza is that this
government in Israel in particular is
not being driven so much by necessarily
rationality strategy achieving its
actual War aims it's being driven really
by the political calculation of Prim
Minister Netanyahu and importantly those
around him seeking to succeed him right
so you showed a clip of Y Galan the
defense minister very much seen as
someone trying to out Haw Netanyahu
right you've now seen Benny Gans the the
the kind of DC preferred alternative to
Netanyahu also come out and say we want
to hit Iran hard now what that means for
the US is even if they're in a scenario
where the Biden Administration can avoid
an Israeli as escalation against Iran I
think that they then feel they lose
political Capital to stop Israel from
doing other things they don't want
Israel to do so that means the operation
in Raa in Gaza which the US is extremely
worried about what that would look like
and what that would mean for
Palestinians for international opinion
against Israel that also means Lebanon
right that's a place where Israel could
say okay if you're not going to let us
hit back at Iran in some huge traumatic
way we have been kind of chomping at the
bit to going into Lebanon I think
there's a real fear Among Us officials
that the leverage to stop either Rafa or
Lebanon is now quite low on the US side
especially because President Biden chose
in this moment to revert to what's
called his bead strategy with Israel so
demonstrating overwhelming military
diplomatic rhetorical support for Israel
in a bid to kind of gain American
influence that hasn't worked in Gaza so
I don't know if it'll work for the
Americans going forward looking at the
scale of the attacks Muhammad um you are
telling us things that are not what we
are hearing from the Americans and the
Israelis you say that two uh bases uh
were hit and severely hit we've got no
pictures of that we've got no reporters
to go to the scene and yet the narrative
that's coming out from the US side let
me quote you uh the National Security
Council spokesman of the US Admiral John
Kirby an incredible military achievement
by Israel is is just an extraordinary
example of mil military superiority what
do you say to that and you know isn't
isn't this damaging for Israel's as for
Iran's military reputation uh in the
region and and damaging for domestically
for
Iran are these the same Americans who
are saying we have no evidence of
genocide in Gaza or are these the same
Americans who are saying that our
intelligence says that they were tunnel
under ala hospital or that the uh that
the uh resistance they would they bomb
their own hospitals I think that's the
same intelligence agency so I wouldn't
to take it too seriously in just you
made some specific claims which I
haven't seen elsewhere before this
program certainly the Israelis are
saying that a base called neim uh which
is in the south of Israel in the desert
that that suffered some minor damage
just just to be clear for us where is
the other base uh that Iran says it's
sely damaged first of all uh it's very
surprising that in this base in southern
Israel uh only a small little girl was
severely wounded I wonder what she was
doing there but uh I I think it's all
you have to do is ask the Israelis to
let you see the base and take a
comprehensive tour of the base and I'm
sure all is well but if really indeed
the isra regime was successful then why
are the Americans so worried about the
uh expansion of the conflict okay
muhamad sorry to interrup mammed but
just to be clear just to be clear
because you made an allegation about two
bases can you name the other base for us
please yes it's an intelligence
gathering base uh which the Israelis
have are using against uh the resistance
in the north and in particular in Syria
so I think you know this 99% stuff
reminds me of the elections of these
governments that are controlled by the
United States these presidents which all
all get 99% of the vote the fact is that
uh the Israeli regime last night was
humiliated and the Iranian hit them back
and when your when your guest goes and
says that uh Arab governments are or you
know what what their position may be we
have to look at what people on the
streets are saying not at what
governments are saying in fact if the
greater the gap between the governments
and the people in the region when it
comes to Israel the worse it is for
those governments so when for example
the jordanians are seen to be siding
with Israeli regime that's the Jordanian
government that's not the Jordanian
public let's let's separate these two
but uh again as I said if the Iranian if
the Iranian uh offensive capabilities
are so weak then then the United States
should encourage the Israelis to attack
Iran again but I think the Americans
know that if Israel strikes Iran again
the response will become even more harsh
this time
around Benny gance uh one of the key
members of the war cabinet Yosi is
saying that Israel will extract a price
in a time and manner of Israel's
choosing do you you think it plays into
this in any way into the calculations of
of exactly what scale Israel's response
is the fact that this attack by Iran was
very clearly telegraphed in advance it
took place at a time when both Israel
and the US were on the highest state of
alert and the fact that there were no
deaths well there was an element of a
theater in all of this where they we
could watch at home and actually know
exactly when the the drones and the
ballistic missile and the cruise
missiles were were were launched and
what we hear now that basically there
are two Iranian
narratives that contradict each other
but one for domestic consumption and one
for international and strategic reason
for domestic reason it's presented as a
great success and there is some story
about about Israeli basis badly Hur
though you can imagine that satellite
imagery by now would have exposed
something like this and it be revealed
in in in in in public so this probably
is is is a kind of a narrative developed
domestically in Iran on the other hand
it was almost obvious that Iran didn't
want to hurt Israel too much because
they understand the consequences of it
and they didn't want to push either
Israel the United States the region into
into a Cascade war war so between the
Strategic and the need to appease some
domestic pressures there can now some
some not only paradoxes but there are
there there are tension and what Benny
Gans which is one of the more
responsible members of of of this
cabinet says you know Israel will choose
its time and and the manner of
retaliation in other words Israel
doesn't need to retaliate right now
because there was no major danger and Ma
major ma major threat or major damage to
Israel let's remind ourselves actually
the damage was because two weeks ago and
everyone expected and accepted that Iran
for to a certain degree has the right to
response to that the question was is the
time the scope and and the place and now
we know how it happened then everyone
can move move on and again Iran in many
ways by fighting through proxis was
better off and while Israel has been
criticized for for the last six six
months and being isolated right now Iran
actually made Israel Israel standing
internationally in a way better
stand Akbar um we seem to have evidence
that that the US did get a direct
warning and certainly uh the Iranian
side are saying that they did warn uh
the US the evidence I have for example
the US President Joe Biden was at his
home in Delaware and then he hurriedly
hurried back to the White House because
he knew this was coming as a diplomatic
correspondent for your organization how
much knowledge do you have of what's
been going on behind the scenes in
recent hours and
days yeah there are two channels between
the US and Iran to kind of pass these
messages of De confliction or any other
kind of important message they need to
pass right so one is through the Swiss
who are sort of the guardian of of any
diplomatic relationship where there is
antie between two countries and then
Brett Mur uh who is President Biden's
quite controversial Middle East advisor
but very influential Brett mcgurk has
been running his own kind of channel in
recent months in Oman an Arab state that
does maintain some degree of relations
with Iran so there are these channels
and certainly it's understood in DC that
tan does not want sleep in some huge way
right now and also perhaps is not have
the bandwidth to do so I mean given the
regional situation where yes Arab states
are very conscious of of their
population being Palestinians they're
also very worried about Iran I mean
that's indisputable there's a lot there
right and then there's Iran's own
domestic situation coming now almost two
years after Mass protests for over the
killing of a of a civilian woman so
there there's a lot of reasons why Iran
may not want to escalate right now
Washington doesn't want to escalate but
I think the wild card here remains that
Israel cabinet right and I think one
thing I just want to highight is that in
this moment of Bluster in this moment
where we're still talking incredibly
right after escalations on both sides
the is really attack in Damascus the
Iranian attack today from Iranian soil
into Israel we're still talking about
further escalations okay now who's going
to punch back in a bigger scarier way
and that's exactly the kind of talk that
a lot of us officials don't want to see
um and conversely at the political level
in the US we see President Biden and a
lot of lawmakers especially Republicans
saying the time is right to send $4
billion more weapons to Israel right so
that's a stalled military package that
Biden has wanted since the start of the
Gaza War so while there's a lot of
hesitation there's also a lot of
political maneuvering including in DC
and in Israel to escalate further and to
arm Israel more which leads to greater
risk Muhammad let me ask you about
diplomacy that might be going on behind
the scenes um you've heard heard Brett
mcer maybe talking that Akbar is saying
directly to the Iranians what's your
understanding of any direct contacts
because of course Brett mcer was part of
the Obama Administration as are many of
the officials in the Biden
Administration Bill Burns the CIA
director he was involved in nuclear
diplomacy Jake Sullivan the National
Security advisor he previously was
involved in negotiations with the
Iranians you know all this well Muhammad
because you were an adviser at one point
to the Iran nuclear team are there
Direct talks between the two
sides no there are no direct talks
between Iran and the United States and
we have uh indirect Communications
between the two countries that have uh
been utilized for uh years now and of
course the Iranians have sent messages
to the United States and the United
States has sent messages to Iran and the
United States knows quite well that
escalation is not something that's in
interest of the United States if the
United States were to get involved these
very same missiles and drones that are
highly capable will destroy us bases in
the Persian Gulf region and then uh
across the region and those countries
that host those bases will be seen as
complicit and that would bring about
massive destruction and the uh it will
destroy the global economy because
energy energy prices will go through the
roof so the Americans they have enough
San people left in Washington I think
that would understand that they can say
the propaganda about how all the drones
and missiles were stopped and and all
that and how in Gaza Israel is winning
and how in Lebanon they're winning and
the Americans are winning everywhere and
how Russian drones and missiles are all
shot down they also they're also being
shot down 99% of them in Ukraine but the
Americans are losing across the board
and the West is on the decline and so
Americans let me let me let me let me
bring in Yosi on this because it's
pretty clear the US I think all of you
are saying this wants to draw a line
under this and stop any further
escalation and that seems to be Iran's
position too but y see we've seen
President Biden in the last six months
give unconditional support to Israel uh
to defend itself we've seen President
Biden send a naval Amada to the region
we've seen him provide diplomatic cover
for Israel at the United Nations and
we've ke seen him continue despite all
the deaths of civilians to send weapons
to Israel and yet whenever Biden has
said show restraint respect my red lines
Netanyahu does not listen to him so what
sway does Joe Biden have over Israel and
the current Israeli government right
now and I think we need to differentiate
between the US policy when it come to
Gaza and I think we should have seen
them way more proactive President Biden
in in in stopping the war CIS far
humanitarian cisar and and and and
allowing more more humanitarian Aid
entering the the release of the hostages
and so on and so forth there is there
was not enough pressure on netan and
differentiat from the attack last night
that I think the United States and the
other allies were were were right in
stopping this income drones and and and
and miss
but when it comes to the United States
it has all the cards when it comes to
Israel if it wants it can actually put
enough pressure on Israel again not
necessarily to do exactly what
Washington wants but enough sometimes to
save Israel from itself and the way and
and the thing I agree with the I think
lot what I disagree because actually
Iran is supporting all the wrong causes
right now in the Middle East and also in
in Russia in in in its war with with
Ukraine but when it comes to to to Gaza
Israel is not winning the war in Gaza
it's making only make it worse for the
Palestinians and for Israel and if it's
the role of the United States actually
to help the Israel to get beyond the war
to think about the day after in Gaza and
try to build also a new security
architecture in in the Middle East which
will include peace with the Palestinians
more inclusive including of Iran but at
the same to look at Iran as not an
adventurist force that destabilized the
region so you say that the US has all
the cards Yosi and not been prepared to
use them until now Akbar we heard mammad
talk about potential economic meltdown
globally if if if this was to expand
into an allout war between the two
countries well just seven months away
you've got a US presidential election do
you think President Biden is prepared to
use all these cards
now I think it's indisputable that if a
major Middle East consecration occurs
which would as Mohammad mentioned
include right Iranian or proxy strikes
on us bases probably in the Persian di
probably shutting down shipping routs
and energy exports that would be a huge
blow to American global influence to
President Biden's re-election
prospects I will say the US knows it has
the leverage right so I think one one
factor in this conflict that hasn't
gotten enough attention is that in a
couple of spaces President Biden has
used that leverage so on October 10th
for instance we know from The Wall
Street Journal that Israel was ready to
strike hisbah in Lebanon right they had
made a decision they wanted to expand
the War President Biden had a 45 minute
phone call with Netanyahu and said this
is not happening what I think is so
striking about that is that that means
Biden and his team have known since
October time that will take one phone
call to stop Israeli actions whether
it's in Palestine in Gaza in the West
Bank where they say that're quite
concerned and also regionally they
haven't made that choice broadly I think
that calculation could shift as we get
closer to the election and I do think
zoomi out brought a picture yes
President Biden is thinking about his
re-election in November but he and his
team this is a this has been one of the
handicaps of the Middle East approach
unfortunately but it it remains one of
their focuses they see themselves as
these adults in the room right not just
dealing with the conflicts of today but
setting the stage for us relevance on
the world stage in the future so they
are very much thinking about the Pacific
they're thinking about the war in
Ukraine and European security and from
that point of view they do not want some
destabilizing Factor some destabilizing
conflict in the middle right now that
upsets the relationship stability in the
Pacific right and upsets energy security
there they do not want uh some kind of
shift of Arab states towards Russia
feeling that Russia is more successful
in Ukraine so they're very conscious of
those factors as well as they're making
the decisions on okay thank you very
much to all three of you our guests
today Muhammad Mandi Yosi meckelberg and
Akbar Shahed armed as ever Al jazer aims
to give you the most comprehensive
coverage of what's going on in the
region and you you can always find
context and Analysis on our website
alo.com your views Are Much appreciated
too you can contribute on our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory or find us
on X where we're at AJ insidestory from
all the team here in doart please stay
safe I'm James baz and I'll see you back
here very soon bye-bye for now